AI-based Hybrid Approach (RL/GA) used for
Calculating the Characteristic Parameters of a
Single Surface Microstrip Transmission Line
Werner John Emre Ecik Philip Varghese Modayil Julian Withöft
PYRAMIDE2525 Information Processing Lab Information Processing Lab Information Processing Lab
TU Dortmund TU Dortmund TU Dortmund TU Dortmund
Paderborn - Germany Dortmund - Germany Dortmund - Germany Dortmund - Germany
werner.john@pyramide2525.de emre.ecik@tu-dortmund.de philip.modayil@tu-dortmund.de julian.withoeft@tu-dortmund.de
Nima Ghafarian Shoaee Ralf Brüning Jürgen Götze
Information Processing Lab EMC Technology Center Paderborn Information Processing Lab
TU Dortmund Zuken GmbH TU Dortmund
Dortmund - Germany Paderborn - Germany Dortmund – Germany
nima.ghafarian@tu-dortmund.de ralf.bruening@de.zuken.com juergen.goetze@uni-dortmund.de
Abstract— This article presents an approach for a hybrid AI The solution of the Laplace equation associated with the Q-
method (for predicting the characteristic parameters of line TEM case addressed here is described by a Fourier series
networks on PCBs using a simple example (single surface approach [1]. The unknown series coefficients are determined
microstrip structure -outer layer). This article is part of the
using first-order spline functions to describe the potential at
current developments in the field of Physically Based AI
the boundary layer between two dielectrics and to minimize
Methods for EDA Applications. The contribution presented
the electrostatic energy W’e in the region under consideration
here must be understood as a proof of concept and serves to
[2]. Thomson's theorem [3] is used for this purpose.
better understand the application of a hybrid algorithm (ML-
Assisted GA: DDRL + GA) for the purpose of shape The new approach for the implementation of deep
optimization in the solution of physics-based problems with the reinforcement learning (degenerate deep reinforcement
application to a simple problem (field problem for Q-TEM
learning (single-step DRL)) presented in [4] is used here to
structures; single surface microstrip). To determine the
find the required shape of the potential function respectively
characteristic parameters for the Q-TEM case, the shape of
the electrostatic energy W’e and its corresponding
potential curve describing the solution of the corresponding
field problem is determined using Thomson's theorem (energy characteristic transmission line parameters.
minimum of the microstrip arrangement under consideration). DRL helps achieve a near-global solution initially, which is
Keywords— Physical-driven scientific computing; physically further optimized using a Genetic Algorithm (GA) [5]. A
based AI methods; machine learning; predictive modelling; single bezier curve-based shape drawing technique (calculation of a
surface microstrip; degenerate deep reinforcement learning; near-global optimum potential curve) is used for the DRL
genetic algorithms; signal integrity; computational
approach (scaled reward system).
electromagnetics; EDA applications.
The metric behaviour (critical/actor loss/entropy
I. INTRODUCTION
coefficient/reward) of the implemented DDRL as a function
To calculate the characteristic parameters of transmission of training time will be discussed. The physical results
lines on a PCB, the structure to be considered must first be obtained (potential curve (shape) + energy + surface charge
physically described and the necessary physical knowledge density and the resulting transmission line parameters) are
regarding AI modelling must be prepared. The following compared with results from the literature [5] [10].
planar structure according to Figure 1 is used as a model.
II. PHYSICAL MODELLING OF THE PROBLEM (PHYSICAL
PRECONDITIONS FOR SOLVING THE GIVEN FIELD PROBLEM)
The following system-describing equation (Laplace
equation) can then be solved for the single microstrip
arrangement shown in Figure 1:
V (x, y) = 0. (1)
To calculate the required line parameters Z and ϵ , the
△ D eff
length-related capacity parameters (plane problem) C‘ (and
D
C‘ must be determined; two separate calculation steps are
L
therefore necessary. The following equations apply:
(2a)
Fig. 1. Physical model for a plane symmetrical single surface microstrip
structure
First, a boundary value problem must be defined in which the
electric potential (Q-TEM) on the conductive surface and the
conductive boundary of the structure is predetermined, but ; (2b)
unknown on the charge-free surface.